[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
It seems inevitable
that when Westerners are feeling
disconnected from their spirit,
they head to the East or
South America for answers.
Ancient practices continue to
feed these isolated cultures,
some of which we can learn from,
such as the notion of gratitude
and humility.
Jeffrey Wium went to the
Andes to find his truth
and created a beautiful film
about the shaman Paqo Andino.
Welcome.
>>JEFFREY WIUM:
Thanks for having me.
>>REGINA: It's a
very lovely film.
>>JEFFREY: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Really
beautifully shot.
I don't know who your
cinematographer were,
but you really--
>>JEFFREY: I did everything.
>>REGINA: Did you do
everything yourself?
Top flight-- it's
really quite beautiful.
>>JEFFREY: Thanks I had walked
away from that world in 2002.
I was in Hollywood.
I started directing, and I
just didn't find the content
I wanted, and I left.
I actually was injured myself--
kind of that accidental waking
up, that on purpose.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, yeah.
>>JEFFREY: I went out into
small towns and high mountains
and thought I was
done with that.
And then in 2008 I
received a vision
to make the film while
I was in the Andes.
>>REGINA: But you
already had experience.
You said you were
directing before.
But you obviously knew
cinematography as well.
>>JEFFREY: I started
out as a photographer.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
>>JEFFREY: And then I went
into video and a cameraman
and then producer.
I'd never made a film before.
I'd done TV.
And so this is the first time
doing something like this.
What I realized I had to
learn how not to direct
and not how to produce and
how to get out of the way
and receive this whole things.
>>REGINA: Yeah a whole
different deal with this film.
>>JEFFREY: Completely different.
>>REGINA: Should we
take a quick peek at it
before we dig a little
further into your story?
>>JEFFREY: Sure.
>>REGINA: OK, let's take a peek.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[THUNDER]
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: That's
absolutely-- it's beautiful.
And we're going to have
a couple more clips.
But we were talking
off camera, and you
said, shaman isn't
really the right word,
which is what I've
applied to them.
So explain what it is.
>>JEFFREY: Well "shaman"
comes from an understanding
in the North of anybody
working in medicine or ways
that we don't understand.
In the Andes, there's a
specific term called "paqo,"
which means gate or gatekeeper.
It also means master
of the living energy.
So they have a
complete understanding
of animistic consciousness.
For example, they know
how to make it rain.
They can cure cancer
through prayers.
They have a lot of things
that we have simply
forgotten in the North.
And the difference between
a shaman and say a paqo
would be a horizontal
versus a vertical tradition.
The shamanic will take
something and a perception
of being out of harmony and
then bring balance to that.
Where as a paqo will
see that it's a swing,
like health happens, a
homeostasis of movement.
And we don't want to
correct or change it.
But we want to help bring in
a pure energy to support it.
So the vertical aspect the paqo
uses is going into the eternal
or into the etheric realm and
then bringing that to earth
and creating matter with it.
And that's done
through prayers and
through different techniques.
>>REGINA: OK.
Good, well, thank
you for correcting me
and also for explaining
it to us so we
know as we go further
into the conversation who
we're dealing with.
But let's go into the
conversation about you.
You were leading
what a lot of people
feel would be a very
kind of glamorous life,
and you're in Paris,
and you're working
for some kind of
high-end magazines.
Just tell us how you got
there from the suburbs,
through that story,
and to where you felt
you needed to leave it behind.
>>JEFFREY: Well, I grew up
in Northern California out
in nature, so I had a connection
to nature that was very strong.
>>REGINA: Where was that?
>>JEFFREY: In Redding.
>>REGINA: Uh-huh.
>>JEFFREY: And interesting
enough, Mount Shasta,
which is a very
powerful mountain,
was always kind
of on the horizon.
But I had no idea what that
was until I went back in my 30s
and realized the power
of what Mount Shasta is.
And so in Redding and then on
to the suburbs of Sacramento
I found that there
was a deeper calling
that I didn't understand.
I didn't have a reference point
in my immediate surroundings,
whether it be school or going
to the mall or anything that
was in media at that time.
So I put off going to university
and went out into the world.
And as I was going
out into the world
and in different
cultures, I realized
that I found myself
on my time off sitting
in temples or caves
or monasteries
in a really tranquil place.
And as I look back, there
was this deeper calling
that was pulling me.
But I was completely
oblivious to it at the time.
I worked in the
fashion industry.
I worked in television.
I worked in media.
And that had taken me to
many places around the world.
And then ultimately
I got to Paris.
>>REGINA: People love
hearing about that.
Tell us about that part too.
Tell us a little bit
about your resume.
>>JEFFREY: Well, I explored
the aesthetic in photography.
And I was in front of
camera for three years.
And then I realized
that you kind of
come to the end of a program,
if you will, or a time.
And then you realize it's
not really feeling something
deeper, even though I didn't
know what that deeper was.
So I went behind the
camera, and then I
get to learn all the technical.
And I worked my way up
through the realms in New York
and London and Paris
and Tokyo and Sydney
and really got out in the world.
>>REGINA: As a
fashion photographer?
>>JEFFREY: As an assistant.
>>REGINA: An assistant, OK.
>>JEFFREY: An assistant
to photographers
or doing interviews of people--
artists and writers, things
like that, government officials.
And I kept finding myself drawn
to kind of the intangible,
and it was something
that was strange for me
because I couldn't put my
finger on it because it
was intangible.
But there was a
feeling here that I
had that was so strong that
it wouldn't let me sleep.
And so every time
I got to a place
where I needed a break because
I'd work so hard and was tired,
I would go on retreat, and
I'd find myself again out
in nature.
I would have these
mystical experiences
that I couldn't explain.
For example, animals-- I was
at a monkey temple in Nepal.
And a couple hundred monkeys
came and sat around me
and just stared at me.
And I really didn't know
what to do with that.
And other times I'd
have experiences
where energetic beings
would show up in light form,
and they would talk to me.
And again, I had no reference
growing up for any of this.
And so I desperately
started to seek out
people that could explain
these mystical experiences that
were happening.
And little by little
I came into contact
with elders and
different people that
started to explain this to me.
And as I developed
that aspect of my life,
I started to see that I
wasn't being fulfilled
in the what I would call
superficial aspect of finding
your happiness by
buying something,
by trying to fulfill
yourself outwardly.
>>REGINA: You were really at
the epicenter of the material
world.
>>JEFFREY: I was.
I went into the heart
of darkness-- my own.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And being
as sensitive as you
are, how was that
showing itself to you,
and what were you
observing in others
who were in the game with you?
>>JEFFREY: I saw a lack of
decency and a lack of respect,
a lack of kindness,
an agenda of people
trying to climb the ladder
and step over everybody else.
They would say one thing
to you to your face
and then stab you in
the back the next day.
And I just didn't feel
a cohesion in my body,
and I felt my body
starting to break down.
I was stressed out.
I was working too much.
We'd have 16 to
20-hour production
days for a month on end and
traveling to five continents.
And it just was wearing me down.
So--
>>REGINA: Well-- go ahead.
>>JEFFREY: I want to say no
matter how much perks they give
you and no matter how
nice the hotel was
or first class this
or whatever, there
was something that it couldn't
touch and it didn't provide.
So I have a very
deep gratitude that I
get to experience that and see
that I couldn't find what I
was looking for outside myself.
But yet I didn't know
how to look inside.
>>REGINA: Yes, and what age
were you when all of this
was playing out?
>>JEFFREY: 21, 22, 23, 24.
>>REGINA: OK, yeah,
it's interesting.
That's a really
big dividing time.
I had a similar experience
at the age of 26.
By this time, I was
first class flights
to New York, to Rockefeller
Center, anchoring sports,
and network sports, and, again,
the beautiful hotels, loads
of people there to take
care of you and all.
And I remember this
one defining day.
It didn't feel good.
For some reason, it
just didn't feel good.
And there was this one day.
It was the Christmas season.
I was going to
another playoff game
to interview the head coach
before our weekend coverage.
And I saw a little
family of three or four
of them-- I think
they had two children.
So it must have been four
people-- getting on the plane,
walking past me.
I'm in first class.
And they had little bags of
presents for their family,
and they were so excited.
And I thought, that's living.
What I'm doing is something
totally different than that.
And there was no
amount of anything
that could make it feel good.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah,
I believe firmly
that we have whatever
experience we
want to have until we have
these turning point moments,
where we recognize,
oh, it's not this.
It's about something else.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm--
love, connection,
kindness, as you say
all of these things.
But you went further.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah, I found
that out in the high plateau
of Tibet or up in the high Andes
or even with the Aboriginals
that are way in the Outback
or the Inuits in the Arctic,
there's a sparseness to their
life that is so profound,
and there's such a simplicity.
But there's such
a sophistication
in their emotionality and in
their weave in their villages
and in their family.
There's something there
that, in large part,
we've lost in the West
and we've tried to replace
with these other things.
And so for so many
of us, we go, and we
try to fill that
space, only to find
that when we get there,
like your experience,
we're not actually there.
But we've achieved what
we've wanted to achieve.
And so knowing that
there's no mistakes,
we simply just turn the
boat and go somewhere else.
And so for me I came
up against a place,
for example, in Los Angeles,
where I started directing.
And halfway through my first job
I was sitting at the monitor,
and I realized I
don't do this anymore.
And it just all
came crashing down.
But I still had the
whole shoot to do.
And I just worked
my way through it,
and then I immediately moved out
of Los Angeles up into Topanga
a little further, and
then six months later
up to Eugene, Oregon.
And that took me
to China and Tibet,
and that journey
started to unfold.
And the more I found the courage
to question what I thought
was the answer, it was
like the doors opened.
And the little old
man in Asia literally
came up to me in a temple and
said, what are you doing here?
And I said, I'm meditating.
And he said, no, what
are you doing here?
I said, well, I think I'm
trying to figure this out.
And he said, no, no,
what are you doing here?
Go home.
You incarnated over there.
That's where your answers are.
You can't run away from
yourself and come over here.
That's a step.
But your solution
and your answers
lie back in the
places you're leaving.
And to me, that
was the last place
I wanted to go
because it was so--
>>REGINA: But that was a
profound and very true answer
>>JEFFREY: Yeah, and I
didn't want to go there
because that's what I had left.
And I had no way, no map.
>>REGINA: You left your
version of it anyway, right?
>>JEFFREY: Right, I had
no map to figure out
how to get back
into it, understand
what was left
there-- the gold that
was hidden underneath
the lid, so to speak,
and how to bring that
experience forward.
And I came back, and I
studied with Native Americans,
and I studied with
Amazonian shaman.
And they started to help me put
a reference point for myself
in the bigger picture together.
And then, as I mentioned,
I injured myself,
and I was really that
the stopping point.
And then as I went to healing,
I realized that I couldn't just
deal with the physical, because
the physical was bringing up
the emotional.
And I couldn't just deal
with the physical-emotional,
because the emotional
was starting
to bring up the paradigms
I was operating under.
So suddenly, this whole
holistic idea of I
have to look at
it all and I have
to die back to
everything that I think I
am to find out who I really am.
And that process
is still going on.
I hope it continues to go on.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK, so
you first started East
to China and Tibet.
So tell us a bit about
what would happen in Tibet.
What was that part of
your adventure about?
>>JEFFREY: Tibet, I
went to study Qigong.
And I was studying
in Portland, Oregon
with a Chinese master, who then
we went to China and studied.
And then I went on to Tibet.
And while we were there--
actually flying there--
I met a woman who was doing some
work at the university there,
and she invited me to stay to
do some translation work, which
was kind of the landing point.
And so I stayed on
after the group left,
and I found myself
in the temples.
And one day I was walking
around one of the temples,
and there was about 100 monks,
lamas, and a rinpoche chanting.
And I stood there
observing them,
and the next thing I know
they're pointing at me
and asking me to come
and sit with them.
And I was embarrassed, and
they just said, no, go ahead.
And I sat.
They put the cape on
me-- the big yellow hat.
And here's this
young Western guy
in the middle of
Tibet, way, way out
in Gyantse and in the
middle of 100 monks.
And they all just looked at
me and said, do you remember?
And I didn't.
>>REGINA: That's what
I was going to ask you.
>>JEFFREY: As soon as
I started chanting,
I realized I knew how to chant.
I knew how to do
the guttural chants.
And I decided things like that,
where you're put in situations,
when you allow yourself to not
stop yourself from something
you don't know or you're unsure
of, but just to go with it.
And that led me to work
with the Dalai Lama
and receive an initiation and
then go up into a Dharamsala
and have really
mystical experiences up
in the Himalayas.
>>REGINA: What kind of
mystical experiences?
>>JEFFREY: Oh, I haven't
really talk about them,
but I guess I will.
>>REGINA: Would you?
>>JEFFREY: Yeah.
I would have
experiences with beings
that would manifest in
their light bodies right
in front of me and talk to me.
And it seemed as real
as talking to you.
But when I was out
of that context,
I had no context for it.
Another time I was walking
at night in the forest,
and the photons in my body lit
up and lit up the whole forest,
30 or 40 feet around me.
And I just started crying.
I had no idea what that
was or how, what, who.
And so I sought that
information out.
And as I went to the ancient
tribes and the elders
and I would tell my story, and
they would just smile and say,
good, now we can
begin our training.
And there was something about
the mystical experience that
happened, which was
the key that opened
the door to the next step.
So again, it's about going into
that place where you don't know
and learning to be comfortable
enough and courageous enough
to just allow yourself to
be used as an instrument
and eventually come to
a place of consciousness
of how that instrument works
in the whole structure.
So with those old,
ancient traditions
in India and China and Tibet,
Korea, Japan, South America,
Australia-- anywhere
in the world--
the wisdom keepers
are the ones that
are holding this
until this time,
until we come forward
and say we're ready.
I'm not interested in power.
I'm interested in truth.
And one of the steps is getting
past a cumulative safety,
like you're talking about,
your experience in the aircraft
things like that.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm, Let's talk
for just a moment about
"do you remember--" the
comment, "do you remember."
So shall we take away
from that this was not
an unfamiliar experience
to you in times past,
that you have likely
incarnated among them before?
And then did you ever come
to learn why you decided
to incarnate in the
West and do life the way
you did it this time?
>>JEFFREY: A Lipan
Apache elder said to me,
you know, the best camouflage
for you is a three-piece suit,
because you can go inside
of any environment,
and no one will
know who you are.
They'll just appear
in a certain way.
So it's one thing to
protest on the outside,
but it's another thing
to work from within
and move it that way.
So as far as a
question of memory,
I think all of
these realms are not
about learning anything new.
I think they're about-- I know
they're about remembering.
So as I went through
the memories,
for example, when I got to the
Andes, it was like coming home.
I didn't speak Quechua.
I didn't speak
Spanish at the time.
But there was something about
the resonance around me,
where I felt completely
held in a way
that I didn't feel
held in the North.
I was never trained, or it
was never a model for me
how to be an
emotionally strong man.
It was always about competition.
It was always, always about
bigger, better, faster, more.
And here, in these
cultures, it's
about getting rid of
everything that you're not
so you can know creator
and that creator within.
In fact, it's known in these
wisdom keeping traditions
and even out in the
realms that there's
nothing outside of within.
No god exists outside of the
within because it's simply
our projection into time space
that creates this reality.
So as you start to remember who
you are and what you've done
and those memories
start waking up,
then it becomes a lot
easier because you're not
in a place where you don't know.
You're just simply in a place
where you're remembering.
And that takes a
certain aspect of what
femininity is-- receptivity.
So in the Andes it's
the sacred feminine,
and that's the mystery school
there as opposed to Egypt,
which is the masculine
or Tibet which
is the neutral, the holy child.
In the Andes, it's about
this organic growth
up and ascending.
And in that, you come
to embody yourself
in an emptiness of the mind.
So you can meditate
to quiet your mind.
And then when you
get to that stage,
then you plug into
all the conversations
that are going on.
And so a lot of people will
think yoga and meditation
will take me completely there.
And I found that yoga and
meditation and all of those
are vessels that take
you across the ocean,
only somewhere there you
realize you are the ocean.
And I don't mean that egoically.
I just mean that there's the
aspect of "I am" or Gaiam.
That when you sit
in that experience,
there's a depth to
it where you don't
have to engage from the mind.
You can do the hollow reed,
but you're not hollow.
You're actually in co-creation.
So I don't know if that
answered your question.
But it certainly has
been my experience
to learn to get out of
the way over and over
and over enough, and strip down
enough, enough, enough, even
letting go of all traditions
and lineage and techniques
that I've have learned, to get
to a sense of the bare metal
or the bare carbon.
>>REGINA: And that's
an interesting point
that I wanted to go into
a bit as well-- to move
past ritual, which is
often very anchored
into very specific ways of
having been, ways of the past.
And so just a quick
detour-- Qigong.
What about the value of Qigong?
Because it seems that this
is practiced a fair amount,
certainly in the
East, as a means
of their spiritual practice.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah, I
think all of them--
we talked about yoga
and meditation--
but Qigong, or Reiki,
is a way to become aware
of your energy, not only
what is creating through you,
but what is around you, and then
moving that and exchanging it--
exchanging chi
with the universe,
working with a conifer,
a tree, in order
to engage a symbiotic
relationship,
where you're giving the
carbon monoxide to the tree,
and it's giving you
oxygen in return.
And it's a way to become a
master of your own universe
really, not to sound
like Marvel comics,
but a way of coming
to understand
the power of the creative
force that we each have that
has simply been
programmed out of us.
>>REGINA: Yes, I mean, I
practiced it very briefly,
quite a few years ago.
And I found it beautiful, but
the teacher I had at the time
stopped or left actually.
And so I was let go of it.
But I've been intrigued with
it through the years since then
because it has a little
different quality.
Yoga, all of these things,
have beautiful elements,
but there was
something about Qigong
that was extraordinary
and different.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah, it's a way of
mastery, where you are actually
moving the energy.
And there's stages-- even
yoga, at its highest stage,
is an automatic response.
You're not going through asanas.
You're moving authentically,
spontaneously.
And Qigong starts very
much in that space.
There's routines that
you do, but it really
helps you to become a
master of that working.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
loved the energy part.
That that's what I think
what I was attracted to.
Now we're going to take
another look at a clip, OK?
And this one, I'll bring
that question to you
after we watch it.
Let's take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Again, beautiful.
What were they
referring to when they
spoke of the second,
third, and fourth levels
in asking for assistance in
the spiritual renaissance
of the planet?
We're talking about
planes of reality there.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah, and those
plans exist within us.
So in the Andes, they have an
overlay to the chakra system
that we know as seven or nine
chakras, which are actually
moving to 13 right now.
But they have
three main centers,
and they are known
as [NON-ENGLISH],
which is the intuitive,
intelligence married with
the knowledge from experience.
There's [NON-ENGLISH], which
is the love presence and that
wisdom.
And then there's [NON-ENGLISH],
which is a combination of, say,
second and third chakras.
So you have the womb of
creation married with the will
to bring it forth.
And so when you talk
about the second, third,
and fourth levels,
you're talking
about wisdom aspects within
ourselves for us to embody.
Instead of just being
done at our base,
in our first level
of consciousness,
they're asking to embody the
intelligences in these ways.
And in outer spatial
reality, you're
talking about occupying levels
of energy or consciousness
that exist, say, for
example, from 3D to 4D,
5D, and up to the
13th dimension.
And they're really calling
upon that higher aspects
of ourselves and the
unseen in the internal
to come and be
with us to help us
come back together, because
we've simply just separated.
And we live in the
most violent of times
because we're in the
violence of separation.
We've forgotten how
to be with each other.
We've forgotten the
intimacy of living together.
Everything is confused
with sexuality.
Everything is defending and
protecting and competing.
And in these cultures, that
don't have any of that.
They don't even have the word
"to have" in their culture.
They have no possession.
So when you have no possession,
you have no scarcity,
you have no competition.
You simply have everybody
weaving cloth for each other
and bringing in the realm.
So the work of the paqo is to
reach up and, through prayer,
bring those energies down and
then really impregnate them--
kind of an odd term to use.
But it's what they use.
And lightning is that.
So you bring that force
in and that coding down,
and you impregnate the field.
And then you have a bounty.
So the work of the Paqo
is to work in these ways
to maintain and increase
harmonies in places where,
in our forgetfulness,
we've simply brought it out
of harmony.
>>REGINA: There are a few things
I find interesting in this.
And you used the word
"will" a moment ago.
As I'm watching
the film and also
throughout other traditions, it
appears from the outside view
that the Paqo or the
shaman in another world
are asking for assistance or
permission from the beings
that they're invoking
rather than making
life more of a choice.
This is where New Age an
ancient start clashing.
And the truth is somewhere
in between of course.
But rather than choosing
as an impetus coming
from within your
own being and using
will to carry forward
with that, there either
was a lack or an absence
of what appeared to be will
in all of these ceremonies.
It was more please help us.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah, it's
an aspect of humility,
which is a lot of
times can get confused
with having inner strength.
It's the will has to come
forward to do the ceremony.
And at the same time, like
if we came to do work,
I wouldn't just
impose my will on you.
I would ask of you
where we meet in harmony
so that we can do the work.
So what you experience
in the film,
for example, is that reference
to a higher perspective,
and it's a humility that I
have had the same questions
about that you have.
Because how do we be
co-creative and yet
differ at the same time?
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>JEFFREY: And it
seems like a paradox.
>>REGINA: It does.
>>JEFFREY: But I find that when
you're in those intersections
of paradox, that's when
you're the most real,
because that's where
the unknown is,
where the mind is trying to
figure it out, and it can't.
And that's what heart
intelligence is about.
The mind is simply a tool of the
heart, but we've put it on top.
And we rely on it so
heavily that we've
become out of balance.
In the ancient cultures, they're
still in their heart wisdom
and in their intelligence.
And the mind is a tool that
creates from that place.
So the extension of will is
a way to bring it forward
but, at the same time,
have the humility.
So that if there's any filtering
or oversight or something
you're unaware of, that
you're not stepping on toes,
you're not creating
something lower
than what's possible
from another perspective.
For example, the higher
you climb the mountain
of consciousness,
the more perspective
you have down into the valleys.
So a lot of times
in the Andes you
see in the paqos deferring
to a higher source.
>>REGINA: Yes, it seemed like
that was the primary practice
or ritual anyway.
>>JEFFREY: And that is
a historical aspect that
has come from the
humility of going
through the dark time with
this last 13,000 years,
where we've become very
distant from spirit,
and they really
regulated access to us.
But now that we've come
through that cycle,
and now we're in a
different cycle now,
that willingness is right here.
So every time we pray and ask
for assistance, it shows up.
Now, the key that I found is
are we praying from my needs,
or am I asking the question,
what's best for the people
sitting in front of me?
And when you ask at
the collective level,
the response is much
different than you're just
asking from the personal level.
>>REGINA: Yes and, again,
this is a complex subject.
And the way I've come to view it
as individuated consciousness.
And then, again, here, that's
another subject entirely.
Individuated
consciousness is when
you're talking about waiting
for these higher realms
to be able to give guidance.
I view that in different ways.
Part of the higher realm is
myself too-- my own aspect
that moves beyond time and
space and has access to all
and is part of all.
And so if we're looking
at it as a practice,
the notion of the
Kingdom of God is within,
so this is where
more the Western view
of spiritual integration
seems to go than the Eastern
and South American view.
It's more
individuated, vertical,
bringing the higher
aspects of self
with perhaps some
guidance with you through.
And it seems there
it's more collective.
>>JEFFREY: It's both.
Again, it's a paradox,
because we are working
not just as an individual.
We, in the West, are
working as a collective,
but we don't remember
that aspect of it.
We just think of it as--
>>REGINA: It's an
unconscious aspect.
>>JEFFREY: It's an
And I see the two
as complementary.
There's that saying, we're the
ones we've been waiting for.
Well, we're the ones
they've been waiting
for too, because it was lost
13,000 years ago-- the fall
of man, you might say.
And they've held these
in the wisdom traditions
for a very long time,
waiting for this day, where
we woke up enough to
come back together
so the prophecy of the
eagle and the condor--
the intelligence of the mind
married with the intelligence
of their emotion.
the deference of a
higher power being
without to our knowing that
the higher powers within.
So what I have found,
as a celestial paqo
in the tradition, is
that I bring something
that is different
to the tradition,
but yet they called
me into the tradition
for that very purpose.
>>REGINA: Right, so you're
integrating these conversations
we're having.
>>JEFFREY: Absolutely, I've
had these same conversations
to say but from my perspective.
And they say, yes, absolutely.
And that's why the West has
specialized their minds,
has come to this
understanding that's within,
so that you can take this
knowledge and these ways
and integrate it into what you
know to self realize as God
itself, whatever God
means to an individual.
And they have been
stewards of consciousness
for a very long time, where
their job has been holding
it, holding it, holding it.
>>REGINA: Right to perpetuate
the ways they know.
>>JEFFREY: Uh-huh, and as
they integrate with us,
they then ascend as well.
It's not that they're there,
and we're trying to get there.
It's we're coming
together, and we're all
going at the same time.
>>REGINA: OK let's talk
about 13,000 years ago.
Do their mythologies
or their understandings
historically line up
with global inundation?
>>JEFFREY: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: OK, because this seems
to be coming to the surface
more and more.
I just met with Graham
Hancock last week,
just privately for a little bit
before he was doing a lecture,
and I stayed for that
part of the lecture
of the archaeologists are
going out on a limb saying,
this is fully indicated.
What's interesting to me in all
that, and has been for decades,
is that that knowledge that
existed in those ancient more
sophisticated cultures,
at least aspects of them
at different times
were more sophisticated
in their understandings,
is that didn't die.
That didn't die.
That was kind of exported
around the planet.
There were those who were
placed around the planet
to uphold the knowledge.
Can you tell how
they tell how, say,
the Andeans tell the
story of inundation
and preserve knowledge
and lineages?
>>JEFFREY: Well, yeah,
they are very aware
of the Mayan calendars
and in the 25,920 year
procession of the equinoxes.
And half of that galactic spin
of the Milky Way is shadow,
and half is light, and that's,
as we understand, is duality.
So they're very aware
of all the inundations.
And in fact, the [INAUDIBLE]
priests of the [INAUDIBLE],
one of the places they went,
as well as the Lumerians,
was to the Andes to secure this
wisdom and to keep it safe,
and it's been put underground.
In fact, that's why
the conquistadors came
was trying to snuff that out.
But one of these unbroken
lineages in the Andes
was never found.
They retreated high
up into the mountains
and went into
secrecy since 1532.
And only in the 1950s
were they discovered
by an anthropologist.
And in that, as
they came back down,
they started to reveal that
they have the same birth
legends as the people in
Mali and the Dogon tribes.
They have extraterrestrial
understanding
that is starting to come out.
A lot of the programming
that's on this network
is starting to speak
of these things.
They're very well
aware of all of this
in all of their cosmology.
They've just kept it
inside, and they've
hid, like being a little peasant
farmer, so they weren't killed.
And they realize
that at this time
the world is changing
in such a degree.
They called a [NON-ENGLISH],
and it's a time between eras,
where all hell breaks loose.
And all the
institutions crumble.
Nothing works anymore.
And if we look around
ourselves right now,
that's exactly what's happening.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>JEFFREY: And so they say
that in this 25-year period
is when we transition from one,
like the Hopi will call it,
the fourth sun to the fifth sun.
And in their understanding,
we went through a deluge
13,000 years ago
because we started
tinkering with
different energetics
and working with
pyramids in ways
that were not constructive,
and we erased all our memories.
So you look at all
these different people
who you're speaking about,
and everybody, collectively,
is starting to come together
to recognize it's all the same.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
interestingly it's
shown up in different ways.
Some of it looks like it's
indigenous and ancient
and spare.
In other ways they have
discovered, for example,
Gobekli Tepe, which appears
to be a sophisticated culture
from 11,600 years ago,
not long after the deluge.
So the assumption now,
according to Graham and some
of his associates, is that that
was an area that was simply
seeded with the known
technologies and the knowledge
base of the day, the
lifestyle of the day.
And so same thing in
the areas in the British
Isles-- all over the planet.
It's as though it didn't
happen in a quick way,
that before the
inundation it was
known for quite a long time.
>>JEFFREY: It was.
And preparations were made.
>>REGINA: Preparations
were made.
People were taken out.
If we look at it from
another point of view,
there has always
been air travel.
That's why the depictions
in caves, so people
were taken and placed
around the planet.
And that's your understanding.
That's their understanding
in all of these cultures
as well, right?
>>JEFFREY: Absolutely.
Even though they're, whether
it be the paqos or the Kogi
in Colombia, they're not
isolated in their caves at all.
They're completely connected
through the web of life
to everything going on.
And I'm always surprised
when I'm down there
and I'm talking about a
geopolitical situation
or some aspect that seems
more Western in its mind,
they're very aware of what's
going because they're in tune.
They're sensing everything.
They have like the
ultimate cable.
They have all the
networks playing.
But it's not just on this
dimension in the middle earth.
They're also connected
to all of this.
>>REGINA: Yes, they didn't
lose their sensitivities.
They've maintained
their sensitivities.
OK, so why has the West become
such a focal point then?
The notion-- I
mean, here we are,
living the ultimate in
the material existence,
and also great
creative abilities.
If you look at
the material world
and what has been created out
of our either remembrances
or imaginations, it's
actually phenomenal.
We've created.
Beauty we've created ugliness.
We've created all of it.
But we have been very active
in creation here, which
has manifested in
the physical world.
So when you take their spare
and sensitive existence,
and you take our seemingly
overindulgent and wildly
creative individualistic
existence,
at the expense, again, of
being redundant at all,
why is it that these various
cultures want to engage us?
>>JEFFREY: Because,
not to be cliche,
they're the ones we've
they've been waiting for.
We're the ones we've
been waiting for.
We have this very specialized
capacity to produce and create.
And they're holding a very
deep emotional knowledge.
So go back to the
condor and the eagle
what they bring in
their intelligence, what
we bring in our intelligence
is the perfect mesh,
like a teeter totter
at the balance point.
So my colleagues there use cell
phones and their technical,
not to the extent we are.
And we do meditation and yoga,
but not to the extent they do.
And as we come
together as a whole,
as we remember ourselves as
a family, a human family,
we start to recognize that
like any symphony, the violin
and the cello and the
French horn and all
these come together to
create beautiful music.
But one can't exist in a
vacuum without the other.
>>REGINA: And that's
what's happened
is that polarization of these
lifestyles and practices.
And at the expense of
sounding New Age and cliche,
but having, as I said,
mucked around in these areas
and been in other
times and such,
it seems as though
we're going back
to bringing about the best
of what those early Atlantean
communities offered,
which was that reverence
and that introspection
and total access
to that integrated self and
a beautiful external world.
>>JEFFREY: Right and
even further back
into the Pacific
of Mu and Lumeria,
if you back into those
highly technical advanced
civilizations, they were
actually existing in 5D
in perfect fluid dynamics.
And then we lost it, and
that was because of control.
And that was because of certain
aspects that dumbed us down
and genetic manipulation.
All the ancient tribes are
very aware of all this.
They're holding a
purity of heart form
for us to engage with at that
intersection when we get there,
when we've finally
said enough is enough.
When you had that experience
on the plane that day and said,
wow, look at the beauty
with that simplicity, right?
Same with about
Tibet-- Tibet asked
China to reabsorb it in 1949.
But by 1959, they didn't like
the way it was happening,
and then they decided to leave.
But you've got to
understand that the Tibetans
and the Andeans understand
that sophistication
can be very simple.
And I don't think we fully
understand that in the West.
>>REGINA: No, I don't
think we do either.
>>JEFFREY: So there's
this coming together,
where we go out to the
edge and we realize,
well, this is beautiful, but
I'm really not connected.
And I'm really afraid, and
I'm really in competition,
and I'm hoarding
resources, right?
The disparity of incomes
in the West is ridiculous.
And you see the
change happening now.
You see CEOs dropping
their pay down and raising
all the employees up.
And you see that, and that's
an example of this happening.
And it's exactly what has been
prophesied by these people
because they realize in order
to come into balance and move
to the next level
awareness, we have
to address we're out of balance.
>>REGINA: We do, and
we have to engage
with the physical
and material world
because we're here
incarnated into one.
And so it's not to demonize
a spare way of existence,
which if it's reflected
throughout their culture,
it's extreme poverty.
And as a result of
extreme poverty,
if you're looking
around Peru at large,
get out of some of
the cool little spots
in Cusco or whatever,
people are barely making it,
and they don't have
necessarily ingrained in them
the wisdom of the
people in the high Andes
that you were seeing.
So it's not to
demonize the poverty,
because that's an extension
of that spare way of being.
It's not to demonize the
material world either,
from what I'm hearing you say.
It's supposed to.
Now come into this
beautiful marriage.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah,
when I first went
to India, when I was in my
early 20s, I sat in Delhi
just aghast.
I had no words for--
>>REGINA: I understand.
I went to India.
I get it.
>>JEFFREY: --for what I saw.
Because growing
up in the suburbs
with going to Macy's as
a replacement for church
on Sunday, it just-- I had
no reference point for that.
And that suddenly thrust
me into this place of,
wow, things are really
out of balance here.
>>REGINA: That's a
shocker the first time.
>>JEFFREY: And so
when I realized
I have to look where am I
out of balance in myself,
and then heal it there.
And then I realized
I don't need this.
I need this because
I'm feeling alone
or I'm feeling something that
I see as a negative emotion.
So I try to replace
it with something,
and that's kind of promoted
in the materialistic way.
But really what I found is as
I get rid of all the things
that I identify myself as,
even my name, something
my parents gave me, then
I start to get closer
to an energetic truth
of who I really am.
And then I simply lean into
the paqos or the shaman
or the rinpoche or whomever
it is to say, help me.
Help me remember who it is.
And then their
wisdom is such, it's
like the sustenance of that is
something that money can't buy.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
yet, in the West,
we generally have
enough sustenance
in terms of monetary gain
that we can even take time
to ask these questions.
Where oftentimes in India,
for example, there's
no time and energy
to ask that question
when you're just trying to feed
yourself something above mud.
>>JEFFREY: Exactly.
>>REGINA: So there's no
beauty in that either.
>>JEFFREY: Yeah, I think
spirituality, for a large part,
is a luxury.
But I find it's a necessity.
And so if I'm going and spending
money to entertain myself,
why can't I use that same to
address why I'm uncomfortable
and why I'm looking for
the stimulation outside,
or help others to bring it up.
>>REGINA: So, one of the
things that Westerners
have who are seeking to
fill that empty space
or that disconnected spirit
is retreats of all kinds
all over the world,
whether we head for Bali
or wherever we head.
And you offer these
Wisdom-Keeper Retreats, right?
>>JEFFREY: I do, yeah.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about those
and where you go, who you take,
how long they last, some
of the stranger experiences
that happen during these.
>>JEFFREY: We recognized
really quickly that what
was most important as an
offering was to give people
an opportunity to go
into these cultures,
to go into these landscapes.
And the landscape there
is completely connected
and alive-- the term animistic,
the anim or the light force
in all things is flowing.
So when you experience
the immediacy
of how the landscape, the
elementals, the spirits
respond, it's something
that, again, we
don't have a reference for
that much in the North.
It's the equivalent of
going on a vision quest
or something like this.
But instead of being
alone in that quest,
you are guided and
held in the space,
much like you see in the
film, where we go deep
into these mountains.
We camp at 15,000 feet.
And just that atmosphere
alone has a profound effect
on the body to receive that
much star light at night.
And we simply set up--
>>REGINA: And that little
oxygen during the day and night.
(LAUGHING)
>>JEFFREY: Exactly, well,
it actually aids ourself
and it shows-- any type of
altitude sickness, that's just
a blockage of
energy that's coming
from a blockage
in consciousness.
So it actually
accelerates the healing
by bringing that disparity
or that imbalance up.
And we found that taking people
from the West or the North
and giving them a 9 or 15
day experience, where they're
completely merged
into it, is completely
different than at
a retreat center.
Because even when we
rent retreat centers,
we found that it's
a distraction.
So now we just simply
camp, because everybody
comes together as a whole
and relies on each other.
So those ways we separate
ourselves and go into our rooms
and look in the mirror
and check ourselves
are taken out of the equation.
And what's left is you
and your pure relationship
with the landscape
and each other.
And after five days of
camping without a shower,
there's really no
hiding anymore.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>JEFFREY: So it gives
people the opportunity
to get past a lot of I would
say the pathologies that we've
created in the violence
of our separation.
And I don't mean
that judgmentally.
I just mean that we've learned
to be afraid of each other.
And there, when you embrace
that culture that is completely
woven together and the fabric
of the family is there,
the weave of the
landscape is there,
the immediate connection
with the celestial realms
there, it puts you in
an environment that
is completely
different than anything
that I ever
experienced in my life.
And it puts me in contact with
a-- it's like a fish swimming
upstream to where it spawned.
There's no dams.
There's no river.
It's unbroken.
It's a complete pathway.
And that provides a
clarity that I really
didn't find in a lot
of different places.
I found aspects but
not that fullness.
>>REGINA: Right,
and I can understand
why you'd want to get people
away from retreat centers that
are embedded in the very
culture that they're actually
trying to get away from
for a moment or two.
You said there are some
kind of strange experiences
also that people
find rather mind
blowing when they get
out into that kind
of raw animistic environment.
>>JEFFREY: I think
the relationship
with the elementals is always
the most shocking for people.
So as paqos, we'll
go into prayer,
like you see in the film.
And there's a call and
response from nature.
So maybe a perfectly blue sky.
And as you say your
prayer, lightning
clashes right above your head.
And your mind says
it's not possible
because I know from science this
has to happen to create this,
and it's just not the way it is.
Rain storms come through and
then part and go around you.
Shafts of light coming
down and healings--
any number of things.
It's fantastical to
the Western mind.
But if it's not there,
then something's
wrong to the ancient mind.
It understands that's
the communication.
As I call, it responds.
As I step into myself and
bring something to reality,
the energy from that comes
from those other places.
So it's a collective.
It's you and I coming together
to do work here today.
It's ourselves and thunder
or lightning or rain
or all of these things or
angels, as the Christians would
call it, coming together
to realize something.
And for Westerners
to see that response
is as real as this table,
it takes a their mind--
>>REGINA: Alters their reality.
>>JEFFREY: And just gives a
whole different space to them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I'd like to take a look at
one more clip of the film.
And then you can
explain afterward
what was going on here.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>[NON-ENGLISH].
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: So what was happening?
Who was this person that was
experiencing this blessing,
almost like a baptism of sorts?
>>JEFFREY: This was a
man from the Midwest that
came on one of our retreats.
And he was having a
cathartic emotional event,
where he brought himself kind of
fully loaded to the mountains.
And through the process of
harmonization and purification
and calling these energies,
the energies rise up,
and it causes the body to lift.
And all that emotional
sediment, so to speak, comes up
and then comes out, as
you saw him experience.
He didn't really
have words for it.
He didn't know it was coming.
He just knew he needed
to address something,
and he had no way to do it.
Other forms of therapy that
he was working didn't work.
And so we just put
him in the event
in front of one of
the holy mountains
and turned up the volume.
And you saw him emote.
And also there's a
woman there that's
having a similar experience.
And when man and woman come
into that honesty together,
it heals the
relationship between
the masculine and feminine,
between each other
and within themselves.
And that's a lot
of the work for us
in the West to do is
to learn to be safe--
>>REGINA: A lot.
>>JEFFREY: --with one another--
>>REGINA: It's true.
>>JEFFREY: --to recognize the
strength of the feminine aspect
of me as a man
and the masculine,
and say a man and a woman.
So that the woman isn't out of
balance and competing as a man
but losing her femininity.
Or the man, not in a dominant
aspect of masculinity,
but understands the
sacredness of his masculinity
and how those two work together.
So in these times and
what Allen, the man
we're speaking about,
experience was how
does he then come
out of a position
of protecting and
defending woman
because she has asked him to?
And when woman comes into her
own kind of eternal sense of I
bring in creation
and I birth it,
whether it be a baby or a
book or a meal or anything
like that, it's coming
into the fullness of woman.
And then man can step aside
out of the warrior position
and use his shepherd's hook or
his spear as a shepherd hook
and really come to
shepherd consciousness
and stand there as
the two pillars.
And what's created
in between them
is that holy space where
everything comes through.
That's the sacred marriage.
>>REGINA: Much work needs to
be done in the West that way,
but also in the East and
also in South America.
>>JEFFREY: Everywhere.
>>REGINA: The relationships
between men and women
on the planet are
severely broken, either
from old paradigms or new.
>>JEFFREY: And so the
retreats or the programs
we offer in different
cities around the world
is experientially allowing
yourself to go into a space
and be held in such a
safety and understanding,
and given a map of
consciousness so
you can recognize where
imbalance or unconsciousness
has its place in the cycle, and
then how we become alchemists
and change that into growth.
And in that way, people
have a working functioning
understanding that
they can then take back
to their family, their
boardroom, their classroom,
with their employees
or employers
and start to integrate this.
I always say in the last
day of the retreats,
we just did the prep work.
Now your work's really going
to begin the moment you get off
your plane.
>>REGINA: Right, quite a shock.
>>JEFFREY: They often say, well,
how is this going to happen?
And I say, well, it's
going to be attracted
to you electromagnetically
because your thought is putting
out a certain form,
and you're going
to get exactly the opportunity.
Now, your option is to see do I
run from it, or do I engage it?
Do I see past the
screaming person
that's asking me to love
them in a very strange way?
And do I take this
opportunity to be a peacemaker
and bring it here?
Or do I simply retract
and go somewhere else
and then try to find
myself outside myself,
when all paths go
to the same place,
one's more expensive and maybe a
little more suffering involved?
I can't say that the path
of awakening is easy.
It's very simple.
>>REGINA: But it's not easy.
>>JEFFREY: It takes
a lot of courage.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JEFFREY: And I think these
ancient cultures understand
this and embody it and then
can be that kind of beacon
in the darkness for us.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Well, beautiful work
on your own life
and throughout your lifetime
and also in your film.
>>JEFFREY: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I appreciate
you being here.
>>JEFFREY: Thank you very
much for having me today.
>>REGINA: Yes, it was wonderful.
Again, the film is called
Wisdom Keepers-- Paqo Andino,
and you can see it
here on gaia.com.
Meanwhile, to find out more
about Jeffrey's retreats,
you can go to paqoandino.com--
P-A-Q-O-A-N-D-I-N-O.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]